---
title: "Hermeticism"
slug: "/hermeticism"
---

# Hermeticism 

## Table of Contents 

- [Hermeticism](#hermeticism)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Role in developing modern science](#role-in-developing-modern-science)
  - [Pinciples](#pinciples)
    - [7 hermetic Principles](#7-hermetic-principles)
  - [Other principles](#other-principles)
  - [How reality is divided](#how-reality-is-divided)
  - [Writings: Hermetica](#writings-hermetica)
    - [Technical Hermetica](#technical-hermetica)
    - [Philosophical Hermetica](#philosophical-hermetica)
      - [Corpus Hermeticum](#corpus-hermeticum)
      - [Treatises](#treatises)
    - [Emerald Tablet](#emerald-tablet)



## Introduction

Hermeticism is an ancient philosophical and religious tradition based on
the teachings of the Egyptian god Hermes Trismegistus, who is believed
to have combined the wisdom of the ancient Greek gods with that of the
ancient Egyptians. Hermeticism holds that there is a divine force in the
universe that can be accessed through the power of thought and spiritual
practice, and that this force can be used to transform the physical
world. It emphasizes the value of self-knowledge and direct experience
as a means of understanding the divine. The Hermetic tradition is often
associated with the occult, alchemy, and magic.

One of the most common uses of the label is to refer to the
religio-philosophical system propounded by a specific subgroup of
Hermetic writings known as the ‘philosophical’ Hermetica, the most
famous of which is the Corpus Hermeticum (a collection of seventeen
Greek Hermetic treatises written between c. 100 and c. 300 CE). This
specific, historical form of Hermetic philosophy is sometimes more
restrictively called Hermetism, to distinguish it from the philosophies
inspired by the many Hermetic writings of a completely different period
and nature.

## Role in developing modern science

Hermeticism played an important role in the development of modern
science, particularly in the fields of mathematics, astronomy, and
medicine. Hermetic teachings were highly influential on the scientific
theories of the Renaissance, providing the foundation for many of the
world’s greatest scientists, such as Galileo and Newton. Hermetic texts
also provided the philosophical framework for the development of the
scientific method, which enabled scientists to make accurate
observations and draw conclusions based on their findings. Hermetic
philosophy also encouraged an open-minded and critical approach to
scientific inquiry, which has been essential to the development of
modern science and technology. Additionally, Hermeticism has been
influential in the development of modern therapies, such as
psychotherapy and hypnotherapy.

In 1964, Frances A. Yates advanced the thesis that Renaissance
Hermeticism, or what she called “the Hermetic tradition”, had been a
crucial factor in the development of modern science. While Yates’s
thesis has since been largely rejected the important role played by the
‘Hermetic’ science of alchemy in the thought of such figures as Jan
Baptist van Helmont (1580–1644), Robert Boyle (1627–1691) or Isaac
Newton (1642–1727) has been amply demonstrated

## Pinciples

### 7 hermetic Principles

The 7 hermetic principles are

**The Principle of Mentalism: All is mind**

The Principle of Mentalism states that all is mind. The universe is
mental and all matter is an illusion. Everything is connected and is a
reflection of the same Universal Consciousness. This means that
everything that exists, from the physical world to the spiritual, is all
connected, and all is a manifestation of the same divine energy. The
Principle of Mentalism states that our thoughts, beliefs, and intentions
are powerful, and can shape our reality.

**The Principle of Correspondence: As above, so below**

The hermetic concept of “As above, so below” is based on the idea that
the physical world is a reflection of the spiritual world. It suggests
that the same laws and principles that govern the spiritual world also
govern the physical world. This concept is central to Hermeticism and is
often used to explain the interconnectedness of all things in the
universe. It is believed that by understanding and working with the
spiritual forces of the universe, one can gain access to greater
knowledge and power. This idea is closely related to the Hermetic belief
that all things are connected, and that by understanding and working
with these connections, we can access the divine power within us.

**The Principle of Vibration**

The Principle of Vibration states that nothing rests, everything moves
and vibrates. All energy is in constant motion and is interconnected.
This means that everything that exists in the universe is made up of
energy, and this energy is constantly in motion and is connected. This
universal energy is the foundation of all life, and the vibration of
this energy affects everything in our lives. This concept can be
somewhat related to quantum field theory, as all quantum fields
oscillate with a certain frequency, and the oscillation and interactions
of those fields give rise to the fundamendatl particles of our universe,

**The Principle of Polarity**

The Principle of Polarity states that everything has an opposite and a
complement. All polarities are connected and are part of the same
energy. This means that all things in the universe have opposite aspects
which are connected and are part of the same energy. For example, light
and dark, hot and cold, male and female, etc. This principle states that
these opposites are not separate, but are in fact intertwined and are
part of the same energy.

**The Principle of Rhythm**

The Principle of Rhythm states that everything has a rhythm and cycles,
and these rhythms and cycles can be found throughout the universe. This
means that all things in the universe have an ebb and flow, and these
rhythms are the same throughout the universe. This principle states that
we can use these rhythms and cycles to understand the universe and to
manifest our desires.

**The Principle of Cause and Effect**

The Principle of Cause and Effect states that every action has an equal
and opposite reaction. This means that for every action there is a
consequence, and this consequence can be positive or negative. This
principle states that we are responsible for our actions and that the
results of our actions will be felt in the present and in the future.
This principle also states that we should be aware of the consequences
of our actions and make conscious decisions that will create positive
outcomes.

**The Principle of Gender**

The Principle of Gender states that gender is present in all things, and
each has its masculine and feminine aspects. This means that all things
in the universe have both masculine and feminine qualities and
characteristics. This principle states that both masculine and feminine
aspects must be present in order for balance and harmony to be achieved.
This principle also states that one cannot exist without the other, and
that both are necessary in order to achieve balance and harmony in the
universe.

## Other principles

**God as the All**

In the philosophical Hermetica, the ultimate reality is called by many
names, such as God, Lord, Father, Mind (Nous), the Creator, the All, the
One, etc. However, peculiar to the Hermetic view of the divinity is that
it is both the all (Greek: to pan) and the creator of the all: all
created things pre-exist in God,and God is the nature of the cosmos
(being both the substance from which it proceeds and the governing
principle which orders it), yet the things themselves and the cosmos
were all created by God. Thus, God (‘the All’) creates itself, and is
both transcendent (as the creator of the cosmos) and immanent (as the
created cosmos).These ideas are closely related to the cosmo-theological
views of the Stoics.

**Prisca theologia**

The hermetic concept of Prisca theologia is the idea that all of the
world’s religions and philosophies are rooted in a single, ancient
source of divine knowledge. This knowledge is believed to have been
revealed by Hermes Trismegistus, and is sometimes referred to as “the
ancient theology.” The concept of Prisca theologia suggests that all of
the world’s religions and philosophies share similar core principles and
beliefs, and that by understanding and working with these shared
principles, one can gain access to greater knowledge and power. This
idea is closely related to the Hermetic belief that all things are
connected, and that by understanding and working with these connections,
we can access the divine power within us.

## How reality is divided

The Hermeticism Spheres of Reality are a set of four interrelated
spiritual realms that form the foundation of Hermetic philosophy. These
spheres are the Physical Plane, the Mental Plane, the Astral Plane, and
the Causal Plane. The Physical Plane is the material world of the
senses; the Mental Plane is the realm of thought and ideas; the Astral
Plane is the realm of emotion and feeling; and the Causal Plane is the
realm of will and spiritual consciousness. Hermeticism teaches that by
understanding and mastering these four planes of reality, one can gain
spiritual knowledge and ascend to higher levels of existence.

## Writings: Hermetica

### Technical Hermetica

### Philosophical Hermetica

#### Corpus Hermeticum

The Corpus Hermeticum is a collection of texts written in the 2nd and
3rd centuries CE in Egypt. It is considered to be the foundational
source for the philosophy of Hermeticism. The texts are believed to have
been written by Hermes Trismegistus, a figure of ancient Egyptian
legend. The Corpus Hermeticum covers a wide range of topics, from
cosmology to philosophy and theurgy, and is known for its teachings of
the divine power that can be accessed through spiritual practice. It is
also known for its use of symbols and allegories in order to convey its
teachings. The Corpus Hermeticum is still studied and referenced today
by many scholars of Hermeticism and the occult.

#### Treatises

-   I. Discourse of Poimandres to Hermes Trismegistus

-   1.  Hermes to Asclepius

-   1.  A sacred discourse of Hermes

-   1.  A discourse of Hermes to Tat: The mixing bowl or the monad

-   V. A discourse of Hermes to Tat, his son: That god is invisible and
    entirely visible

-   1.  Hermes to Asclepius: That the good is in god alone and nowhere
        else

-   1.  That the greatest evil in mankind is ignorance concerning god

-   1.  Hermes to Tat: That none of the things that are is destroyed,
        and they are mistaken who say that changes are deaths and
        destructions

-   1.  Hermes to Asclepius: On understanding and sensation: \[That the
        beautiful and good are in god alone and nowhere else\]

-   X. Hermes to Tat: The key

-   1.  Mind (Nous) to Hermes

-   1.  Hermes to Tat: On the mind shared in common

-   1.  Hermes to Tat, a secret dialogue on the mountain: On being born
        again, and on the promise to be silent

-   1.  Hermes to Asclepius: health of mind

-   1.  Asclepius to King Ammon: Definitions on god, matter, vice, fate,
        the sun, intellectual essence, divine essence, mankind, the
        arrangement of the plenitude, the seven stars, and mankind
        according to the image

-   1.  Asclepius to King Ammon

-   1.  Tat to a king: On the soul hindered by the body’s affections

### Emerald Tablet

The Emerald Tablet is an ancient text that is believed to have been
written by Hermes Trismegistus. The tablet is known for its concise,
cryptic statements that are meant to convey esoteric truths about the
universe. It is believed to contain the secret teachings of the hermetic
tradition, and is often referred to as the foundation of Hermeticism.
The tablet states that “As above, so below” and “what is below is like
what is above”, emphasizing the interconnectedness of all things in the
universe. It also states that “all things are formed from one”,
suggesting that all of existence is part of a single, unified whole. The
tablet also encourages the use of alchemy and other spiritual practices
in order to access and manipulate the divine power in the universe.
